1. Hi everyone, my name is Vibhav and my project is about
kinetic parameter estimation. My research involves building
process models for optimization and this work will help me when
I work with plant measurement data to estimate kinetic parameters.

2. So, we are given a reaction mixture containing three species.
We also know the reaction mechanism. The measurements come from
spectroscopy experiments and we want to build a systematic
framework to go from the data to estimating rate constants.

3. The measurements D are taken over sampling times from 0 to 10 mins,
and at each sampling time, we have data for a range of wavelengths
between 180 and 230nm. These measurements indicate the absorbance
of the reaction mixture when exposed to light. We can use
Beer-Lambert's law to relate the data matrix with the concentrations
and absorbances of pure species in this way. E is the measurement
error.

4. This is the matrix representation. Each row of the concentrations
multiplied with the absorbance matrix gives one row of the spectral data.
This is repeated for all sampling times.

5. The is the reaction scheme, and this is the mechanism.
We know the true values of the constants to compare with later.

6. We first visualize the measurement data. We have measurements
D at all sampling times and wavelengths. There are 501 sampling times
and 100 wavelengths.

7. This is how the data can be visualized. At a given sampling time,
we can make an absorbance profile which progresses with each time point.
We can also sort of see 3 different peaks forming at specific wavelengths.
We will refer back to those later. This is the progression in 2D.

8. We also have pure species absorbances -- the S matrix.

9. Now, we want to calculate the concentration profiles.
We apply a ordinary least squares to determine the concentration
profiles C. These are the results. We are also given true concentration
profiles. We compare the two results. The calculated profiles are
the circles. We see that the two graphs virually sit on top of each other.

10. We note that concentration of B peaks at about 1.4mins. Referring
back to the pure species absorbance profiles. We see that the
absorbance of pure B peaks at about wavelength = 200. The absorbance
of the mixture, at t=1.5 also peaks at about the same wavelength.
peaks are aligned. I used this as a sanity check.

11. Finally, to estimate rate constants, we generate the dCdt data
using first order approximation of the derivative. Then we use
this ode from the model and fit a linear model using sklearn.
Here are the results. The results are pretty close to the
true values and the percent errors seem to be acceptable.

12. In summary, we demonstrated a systematic way of estimating
kinetic parameters. This process is set up to be easily extended
to other kinds of reaction mechanisms as well. I used fairly simple
regression techniques, but it can be extended to have more rigorous
analyses as and when needed. This framework will be helpful to me
as it sets the stage for building reliable simulation models.
